There are quite a
number of similarities
between arrays and lists.
Both are sequential data types.
That means they have a first
element, a second element,
and a last element.
Note that the elements are not
sorted, but they have an order.
First, second, and so on.
However, there are
also some distinctions.
An array typically
has a fixed length
and all the elements are stored
contiguously in memory, so one
after the other.
That has quite a lot of
advantages with respect
to performance.
However, such a storage scheme
also has some drawbacks,
and that's where lists
may be a good alternative
because they're
much more flexible.
So let's see what we
mean by flexibility.
One of the things
you might want to do
is, you have a
sequence of numbers
and you want to insert a
new number at some arbitrary
position.
You end up with a
list, or a sequence,
which has one more element.
Alternatively, you
might have a sequence,
and you want to delete
a specific element.
Now you end up with a sequence
which is one element shorter,
but it's still a sequence.
You can do that with
arrays, but this
can result in several
implementation issues.
So before doing anything, one of
the things you should decide on
is what the length of
that array is going to be.
And given that you
might not a priori
know how many elements
the list should hold,
you may have an issue here.
Of course, you can simply
specify something and hope
for the best.
Or, alternatively, you
could use allocatable
and do dynamic
memory management,
but then again, that
requires some bookkeeping
and it will complicate
your life a little bit.
Another issue might be even
more important because it
has to do with performance.
Suppose we want to
insert an element, that
means that you have to shift all
elements from that position one
place to the right.
And that is quite a
lot of operations,
which are kind of expensive.
Because the data has to be
transferred from the RAM
to the CPU and back again,
and that is a bit of overhead.
So it's lots of copying,
but you would end up
with an array
representing a list
with a new number included.
And, of course, the
same applies if you
want to delete an element.
You would have to shift
all elements, following
the deleted element, one
position to the left.
And, again, that is
a lot of copying.
So you would prefer
to avoid that.
To define a list we can actually
use a user defined type.
The first element is the data
we want to store in the list
And in this case, that
would be a real number.
The second element is a pointer
to another list element type
variable.
So, basically, that is next,
and then for convenience we
can define another
user defined type
which represents the list itself
rather than a list element.
That has two pointers as
elements, first and last,
those are intended to point
to the list elements that
are the first and the
last in that list.
A new empty list would just
be a variable of type list_t
and we would set the first
and the last element to null.
A new list element
itself would be
a variable of list element
type and, preferably,
an allocatable.
So we allocate a new element.
We set its value,
in this case to 7.3,
and next we set to null.
These are very simple
ways to create,
on the one hand, a list, and
the other hand, a list element.
Building a list is
fairly straightforward.
We simply start
with an empty list
and then we add a new element.
We allocate it, set a value,
and set the next to null.
It's the first element,
so there's no next one.
And then list%first will
point to that element as will
list%last
The next element
we allocate again.
We assign the value
5.7, in this case.
We set the element%next to null,
since it will be the last one
in the list.
The current last element should
now be made to point to the new
element, and list%last points
to the new element as well.
And this can be repeated.
To add a third element, again
we allocate, set the value,
and set the next to null since
it will be the last element.
The previous last element's
next should point to the new
element, and the list%last
should point to the new element
as well.
Iterating over a list is
straightforward as well.
So let's have an
additional variable,
current_element which is a
pointer to list element type,
and we initialize that to
point to list%first So current
element now points to the
first element in the list.
While current element
is not equal to null,
we make it point to
current_element's next.
So the pointer moves over
the list elements one by one
until it reaches the
very last element.
Then, of course,
current_element will be null
and the whole loop stops.
Inserting an element, we
need a pointer to the element
just before the element
we want to insert.
new_element is the
element we want to add.
element_before is the
element after which we're
going to add a new element.
So, basically, new_element%next
is going to be the element
before next, so it points to the
element after the element where
we want to insert after.
And then element_before%next
is going to be the new element.
And we end up with a list,
which is nicely connected.
Deleting an element is similar.
Again, we need a
pointer to the element
before the one we
want to remove.
And we also need a pointer
to the removed element.
The removed element's
next is going
to be the next element after
the element_before That's
the one before the
one we want to remove.
element_before%next is
going to point to wherever
the removed_element%next
was pointing to.
We end up with a list with no
gaps and, of course, an element
that is pointed to
by removed_element